\section{Introduction}

%Clustering is the task of grouping objects such that the objects in each group
%are more similar to each other than to objects in other groups and such that
%objects in different groups are not similar enough to be placed in the same
%group, according to some notion of similarity.

Clustering is the task of partitioning a set of objects, such that each
partition contains objects that are similar to each other and objects in
separate partitions are dissimilar, according to some well-defined notion of
similarity. These partitions are called \emph{clusters}.

This project is concerned with the clustering of DNA and RNA sequences. A
\emph{centroid} is a sequence that represents a cluster of sequences.

The clustering method described in this document strives to assign each
sequence to a cluster based on the similarity between the sequence and the
centroid. The clustering method does not guarantee a minimal number of
clusters, as the search for a centroid is not exhaustive, nor does it guarantee
to find the most similar centroid for each sequence.

Clustering huge amounts of DNA/RNA sequences (up to 500 million strings of
500â€”1500 characters each) is computationally hard and there are not many
available algorithms and tools for efficient clustering of sequencing data. The
one tool \texttt{UCLUST}\footnote{\url{http://drive5.com/usearch/}} that does
the job is closed-source and considered too expensive.

This project researches the possibilities for creating an open source tool that
can match the performance of the proprietary version of \texttt{UCLUST}. We
present an implementation of a solution that uses the concept of $k$-mer
counting, for measuring the distance between sequences, and utilizes the
$k$-mers occurring in the centroids for improving the search for a centroid that
is within the given threshold distance.
